Digital novel in animate Ellis.
And here is the model that I had applied, like I had joined two trees, and to to to analyze and to present the data that was in animate L is like an electronic literature CS is.
Okay.
moving towards the introduction of this present study digital technology actually offers innovative activities that lead, its users to one human movement, which helps them to find new ways of getting knowledge.
And if we look at Digital literature, it comes up.
After remarkable changes in digital technology and electronic literature is also one of them and it is entirely different from literature and the, if we look at the definition of electronic dictionary says that it is something that is made digitally and
and intended to be observed digitally. So yeah, it is different.
And in this in this section, I'll be explaining the basic difference between these two.
A piece of electronic literature is completely different from print one because it amalgamated, a number of digital elements like sounds like portable images interactivity user, user and the viewers will be interactive there.
And it just amalgamate all these features, together with a written text.
And also, it makes it more flexible nonlinear and more intricate which presents the viewers choices up being integrated.
the environment upgrading has been slightly different nowadays because of this pandemic and this immersive literacy and.
depiction via you via visual expression. So, this breaks down the traditional cycle of reading literature piece.
Yeah, these are the rhetorical questions I was just asking to myself as well and I wanted you to like discuss them as the question of a basic question was, what is the need and the purpose of literature, like, for me, it is for the, for the sake of enjoyment
and, like, Entertainment, and to get some knowledge as well.
But, Yeah.
The second question is why does the teacher always enjoy the status of being transformed and modify.
The third one is are these modifications from like from order to print to do, electronic literature, are these modification really advantageous or not.
Another important question is, does play reading still exists or not. If we are reading it we are really electronic literature. Does this player ratings still exist or not.
This will be answered, like industry but yeah.
Okay, if we are moving towards the significance of this research. Now, the, the findings of this study we don't do the benefit of the society.
Like, more specifically Pakistani settings that the interactive multimodal fiction is new emerging literature, so it is crucial for the digital natives.
Well, I think we Pakistanis are still digital consumers, but yeah, you can call us digital natives as is crucial for the digital natives to understand what are the new modes that are being used in the construction of electronically teacher.
Okay, here are the pew research questions that will be answered in the 30.
Is there any possibility to understand the story Red Riding Hood that electronic version.
As the readers understand that even version of Red Riding Hood in the past.
The second one is bit of the semantic elements of chiggers involved in the construction of the.
Both versions of Red Riding Hood like the pink and the electronic version.
And the third one is are the different modes, there that are presented in the story that Riding Hood electronic version conveying the meaning clearly or not.
Yeah.
Okay, moving towards the framework that I had applied to present the data and to analyze the data from both print version and the electronic version of Red Riding Hood.
So, since electronic literature involves, we will show, we will semiotic analysis, called multimodal analysis that is presented by cast and men live in 1996, then 2001 and then 2006 analysis is attached with the framework.
So, I had just categorized different modes and features like texture and non texture. And in those features, I had further categorize these moves like narrative style didn't text uses interactivity vehicles, and music and songs.
And at the end, these all modes will be discussed, collectively in the collective finding textual and non textual modes.
Okay, here is the literature review the related literature that I have, I had found a lot of a lot of books on multi modality. And on like intermediate ality also and on, like, electronic literature, but unfortunately I have not found anybody that has
been done in Pakistan is setting so yeah.
It would be the very first work that is done in Pakistani setting.
Okay. If we are moving towards the presentation and data analysis of textual and non sexual features. The first one is narrative style in Red Riding Hood both versions.
The piece of electronic literature beers are more realistic approach by presenting via live settings behaviors and events that that I like said as jumping off point for the duration of the story.
That, that, like, said as a jumping off point for the duration of the story. Also the instructions were mentioned in the very beginning that the users and the viewers are allowed to narrate the story to their own understandable at.
So, the genetic and the concept of narratives and edit ology is becoming different.
While we are talking about electronic literature.
The written text in Red Riding Hood.
Well, The electronic version of Red Riding Hood is described and expand to be based on non textual modes. Yet comprehending the master narrative and underlying notion behind the construction of this whole.
There has been brothers, a print version of Red Riding Hood. Little Red Riding Hood is entirely revolving around mono modern text that is the reason that.
So, the linearity makes it possible in the modern modern version of literature to lead towards towards a few indignities confusions and can be considered differently than the authors intended meaning.
So,
on the other hand it is left on the readers and, like, electronic literature is left on the readers and to comprehend it on their own. And if we are giving some more power to the reader, enhance it will enhance their own understand ability of the, of
the thing they are viewing.
Okay, I have I have just extracted up UV wells from the electronic version of Red Riding Hood.
Here are the few weevils, and I have analyzed them via looking there, the color combination, and the expressions, the background. These are all here.
So yeah, it made more easy to the, to the, to the viewer, and the user to comprehend it more clearly than that of the modern modern text.
Okay, uses interactivity in the Red Riding Hood. Okay, in the in the print version you will not be getting any type of users interactivity often the be all and end all of reaching but here in that electronic literature, you will be the user or the viewer
will be getting this opportunity to select and choose the different options to move, and the story further. So yeah uses interactivity, is, is, is like the, the important thing that is used in the electronic literature and cherished and, like, is flourished.
Okay, these are the findings are and conclusion of the study. The present study seeks to explore the difference between mono model and multimodal children's literature by focusing on that in Red Riding Hood, and the paper also questions, the denomination
in literature as something that is needed only. And I've used that multimodal aspects that are different modes that I had told in the very beginning, They should be included in the, in the definition of literature, and they should be better integrated
into the definition.
Okay, the analysis of this study underscores the importance of electronic literature in this digital age.
Specifically in Pakistan, because we are just taking baby steps here. And, like I just know about electronic literature, one and a half year back. And
I don't know where we are in the past, the present study has been completed in Pakistan where the devious 30s in this specific field or not commonly available.
Yeah.
This would be, this will be good for the future researchers to look at electronic literature.
Yeah, thank you.
Thank you so much.
And welcome. I don't know if you saw the chat but as low florists wrote in the chat welcome you found a community for electronic literature here anyway. So we're really happy that you found the conference and that you're participating.
I wonder if we should start with some questions for you, Chris. And then, and then after Judith talk. We could have some questions for Judith and then maybe combine the two but I would just like to invite anyone who has questions to eat for right away.
Yes, if I, if I may, I just wanted to say, you know, I remember, and and, like, it's it's so interesting to see your presentation, and it's always like it's always important of course for us to define our terms, and, and, and the final electronic literature
and all these things and, and one of the things, like it's always great to.
We have to hear this over and over, to see what we're pushing against right that and and it's great to see the evolution of that, like, 15 years ago were really the fighting against the page, in some ways, and and I know that you were touching on some
of these things, because it shows the weight of the the the weather in a different panel. We have been calling that the hedgehog MONUC control that the page exerts over us right like like literature and the page and writing and unit modality instead of
multi modality right like I could totally see right multi modality and as in done fair crash and so, like, like, we're pushing against all that in our normal environments, unless you're in Bergen, or right like when a digital culture program where, where
people get it right, even myself, I'm in North Carolina.
In Appalachian State University in a department that that I need to define electronic literature for all the time. They like they have no idea.
And so, this is this is one of the important things about the yellow, where we kind of come together, and here's people that that understand right we we got it.
And so and so that's really great. And I just wanted to applaud your paper and welcome to our community.
And, and know that, you know, we're here, we're here to help you build right and and we want to hear so much from you so, so just sorry it was more than a welcoming than a question but but yes, welcome.
Thank you very much, and trust me you will be getting more information and more papers in the next yellow conference inshallah.
We are thirsty for it. Right, we, we want to hear, definitely did you say you're just starting a PhD now eat crow.
Yep, I was studying my PhD.
And what will the topic be.
I will be focusing on a part of the technology, multi modality because of course analysis of an interactive fiction and I will be joining different electronic mutated PCs and I'll be analyzing them and, like, in the in the Pakistani setting that would
thing for me and, yeah, thank you very much for the kind of a few point to just go this, I would like to note, however, that anytime we talk about a work of literature.
The first thing that should come out is the author's name, can you tell us why the name of the author which I do happen to know but why don't you tell us, and why you chose her where your topic, why I chose this topic I want to know that I want you to
tell us the name of the author of the work.
Okay. I am not know the writer of the Little Red Riding Hood.
Okay, Leishman Leishman Yeah, because that is the most core part of literature from the point of view, I will say over writer, not necessarily everybody's going to do.
Yeah, why did you choose that particular work which is a beautiful work so, um, because here people, do you know about. Little Red Riding Hood, the print version, the link brothers had done this, but they do not know about Red Riding Hood that is an electronic
version also. So, for the very first time my professor asked me to just, just experienced this and yeah I got this like very much interesting and after that I had just chosen this that
that other that other sees interacting with with MCs. But yeah, this was the very first word that I had experience so I got this.
But So one question I have is because I'm that particular Donna Leachman Red Riding Hood doesn't have very many words does it. It's, it's a while since I've read it but it's a very visual piece isn't it.
So does that make it even harder to analyze us literature Did you find.
Yeah, it was hard but I had applied acuity that is multimodal analysis and here the gas and Melvin has given this model. So yeah I adapted that model and then I put that model and then I analyze those different modes categorically then I compile those
modes and then that result comes in.
Yes, there's some there's some suggestions for you here in the, in the chat as well.
Alex, you don't have a microphone. All right, Alex has a question.
I wonder if it would also be useful to also consider our old version so like folk tale versions of Red Riding Hood and the analysis, did you draw upon other Red Riding Hood versions.
Yeah I bought them but I just want you to focus on these two in this paper.
Yes, for short paper, you've got to focus, of course. Hmm.
And then, you mentioned that there's not a lot of electronic literature in Pakistan yet.
And I was wondering because I've read a little bit about Indian electronic literature and about how like SMS, India In India has more.
India. India has done a lot of work in electronic literature and digital technology they are just incredible people but we obviously we are just trying to like cope with the situation and, yeah, I really trying to this.
But I was wondering whether if you sort of look more broadly at it because I did notice the one of the Indian overviews that was talking about SMS novels and those kind of more social media storytelling as maybe being as visible in an Indian a lot and
guess we've seen similar things in other in other parts of the world as well so I was wondering if you are there any sort of social media storytelling or literary activities that you think One could think of as electronic literature. You think.
But as as a literature student I had not get anything about electronic literature in my graduation and no one even asked me to do that and no one even, like, not even my professor had like asked me, not even the suggested us because we didn't know about
it. And one and a half year back when I was in my MTL I got this idea that. Yeah, there is an electronic musician.
It's, um, I think several of us have been in that position where we're like, discovered, probably we've all been in that position where we discovered electronic literature like wow and then you try to convince the people that you're working with it, or
at the department that this is a good an interesting thing so we're really happy to have you here.
Are you able to share your screen. I will No, thank you.
It's so exciting to be a pioneer I'm so excited for you right what a position to be in. I think we're probably envious. Right, a whole new sort of territory to enter and to.
I'm saying pioneer even though it's a colonial term because that's a little. That's a little segue here.
So my paper is called distributed memories comfy serve gamers forum and the halcyon days of the adventure game toolkit, otherwise known on this panel is now for something completely different.
See why am I not advancing my screen here. There we go.
So my paper starts with a family memory on this is the strong Museum of play in Rochester, and I took my kids there as teenagers that my son was really mad he said, Mom, why don't you take me here when I was a kid right what a wonderland.
And I, my strongest memory of it though was we were in the pinball room which is just incredible lights and sound and every pinball machine you can play for free.
And he wandered away from it.
And he found a table where there was an ancient Oregon Trail playing.
And he sat down at that table and he wouldn't leave, so he spent most of his time at the strong museum for play.
Playing Oregon Trail, which is a game he played as a kid and didn't love very much and he played it at school and he played it at home. And initially I was really annoyed with him because it's expensive it's an expensive Miss, and he sat there playing
a game he could have played at home but I'm glad I didn't really stop him because he was in a flow state.
And I recognized later and then sort of re recognized as I was writing this paper that he was immersed but he wasn't just immersed in this game, and this game is incredibly multimodal right Oregon Trail has been remade in a variety of ways and it's a
board game and a card game and
it's a it's a really well traveled territory. The Oregon Trail, but he was not he didn't like the game as a kid that much.
So what was he doing in his flow state playing this game in the museum. He was returning to a game world, but not just the game world of the game he was returning to his life world to who had been when he had played this game.
He was having an experience of the story.
And that reminded me thinking about that sort of anecdote in my life of this paper, which is a very influential paper for me.
It was a study that was done over several years, and I don't think they, they didn't publish collectively about it I think they published individually about it, this really amazing dream team of people who looked at the problem of preserving virtual worlds,
and on the right you see a list of the games the specific games that they looked at, and one of the chapters in that white paper is the virtual worlds that died during their project, which really spoke to me, and they meant it, kind of, literally.
The disappearance.
Well, let me show you the next slide and then I'll say what was disappearing because how they defined virtual worlds, as they looked at these games and the communities around the games is that they had to analyze game worlds as artifacts, meaning the
software and hardware needed to play them, and then worlds is commodities because, in many cases, these were games that had to be purchased or, there were fees to access.
And then also as communities, the people in and around the interaction with those.
And so the issues of preserving and archiving and curating these worlds required three really different sort of tracks of effort. So the socio technical in and around the artifacts themselves and the platform is in the hardware, the legal in and around
games is commodities when we have laws which protect software from copying which made it actually illegal in some sense to to archive them in a playable state.
And then the communities which require ethnographic, as well as other sorts of efforts to preserve them, which is complicated and difficult. So, when any of these aspects are gone to recreate the world means doing forensic work as people are using that
term now that's a little dark for me I like the metaphor of archaeology in the idea that restorative work can be done to get to get these worlds back, at least, if not back so that you can enter them fully back that you can visit them the way you visit
something that's curated.
And what I'm specifically interested in. In this regard, is particular
Gestalt trying to find the word for it.
More than a community, kind of a early 90s gamers Gestalt that occurred, through the BBs platform compu serve so the pre internet era is something that is personally interesting to some of the people in the room as well.
A fascinating period a period in which the world was discovering electronic literature in a variety of ways.
hypertext based forums, as well as parcel based
text based games, which saw himself more as game than literature, but which I consider also literature
and copy serve was an interesting place for many reasons, its contribution to the internet are often overlooked. Because, in large part, it disappeared.
So compu serve was bought by America Online. In, 1997, and it, its heyday compu serves heyday was in the BBs dial up era.
So, when it when it went away. It turns out that it archived almost nothing of itself.
It's truly a lost world, but the loss is more than just the loss of the digital artifacts. It's also the loss of community, and it's really an under explored community.
So I have an interest in pursuing some archaeological or restorative work, where it comes to the life world of coffee serve and specifically gamers forum, which was a community within the community of companies are.
So, if you're not old enough to remember the bulletin the pre internet of bulletin board era, it was expensive.
You had to pay for your phone call to dial up and then you generally had to pay for a service. So there was what you might call socio technical drift, meaning that people use products differently than they were intended clearly compu serve wanted to make
as much money as possible and users wanted to spend as little money as possible. And so another sort of software developed a taps. This is an example of it, it was the most popular one, which was an interface you used, you would log on to tap says taps
us with a dial up and log on to copy serve, grab a bunch of content and go offline.
Again, and you would read your content offline, and the kinds of content and the kinds of contributions that companies have made to what we think of as normal internet use compu serve invented the chat forum the chat room.
Live Chat was created. I mean, it was happening in other places as well, and in other communities, I'm thinking of marketing, in particular, but e commerce and
electronic sort of encyclopedias and accessible file uploading and downloading user created libraries. A lot of things come to served first which became quite normal costs, internet, but it doesn't get credited for it, so I'm not really aiming to save
copy serve in its place in history. I'm mostly interested in.
Gamers forum. And the way that the gamers forum facilitated interactive fiction writing and playing in the era.
On the right is a snippet of a compu serve gamers forum chat live chat probably a public conference.
And I know that it's gamers forum because I know those people and the funny thing about this clip is that you'll find it all over the internet and it appears to be the only snippet that the internet has found.
However, there. It's a, it's a, it's a screenshot which is why it's rare.
I'll talk about it more, a little later.
But because of taxes and other programs like it.
The artifacts the digital artifacts of compu serve still exist, they're just distributed, and they're distributed on floppy disks in people's basements.
Now, a lot of these floppy disks have been thrown away.
This is an endangered collection of digital artifacts, but all compu serve members have had floppy disks full of the content of gamers forum, and that would include all the main styles of communication which were posts, public and private emails within
the forum indexes of files, the libraries that the files that were uploaded and downloadable and live conferences. We because we use taxes.
We didn't even think to hit the record button, nor did we ask permission.
We just save transcripts of private and public conferences. So one of the first people that I contacted about the idea of restoring This is actually Bob Bates, who you see here, in, in this chat, he, he wrote Eric Lee unready.
He's an old, he's an old text adventure game writer, but he worked for legends in this era. So I mean, maybe I'll I guess I can say it now. What's different about compu serve from the other place where he led people and other sort of text adventure, people
were hanging out on records. In fact, and rec games in fact, starting in the same era starting in the late 80s, was that that was
more academically oriented. So people who are in academic institutions were hanging out and participating and compu serve was sort of more working class citizens, I guess you could say it was full of industry people.
So, so we. I was a writer of interactive fiction but I hung out it was so fun. Not only were you hanging out with people you know in the industry.
There were also science fiction writers everywhere and those of us in gamers forum also hung out in the science fiction forum and it was just a really exciting era, to live in and be in disappeared from the world.
So, the specific platform that interests me in that era is a GT.
The adventure game, a toolkit, and Jimmy ma her, who has a blog called a digital antiquarian to me has done more to restore.
He does. I see him as an archaeologist of, of, of the era.
He, he finds games and he interviews the writers and he's really done more for this era than anybody that I can think of and the screenshot. This is from one of his blogs when he talked about gags the generic adventure game system, which the HGTV adventure
game system was based on.
I found gigs because it was installed in XT computer I bought when I was living in Boulder, Colorado in the, in the mid 80s.
And when you, I, I wrote so many little games on it, and stories, interactive stories and games with it that I it was shareware I decided to pay the money and this is not exactly the picture on the left, not exactly what I received that because this this
adventure game toolkit software guidebook hadn't yet been made, but I got back, a slew of floppy disk and learned that, again, this had been, which was written by Mark Welch had been ritual by David Marburg as a GT.
And one of the things that Dave homework did was, pick up.
So Mark wells had a game contest in 1986, which ran once four games, running gags, and this code here on the right you see is from the game that one that 1986 contest defenses of Alice one for looking glass and came back not much changed.
And you can see that it's sort of as a platform and as a language.
It's sort of a database where you define a rooms and things and creatures. And you, there are there are some
variables that you can set for each of these including text variables to make a game, a GT, use that same sort of model. But, improve its capacities, significantly.
This is a piece of a GT, and what it added was the ability to make man's. And so at the bottom of this snippet you'll see that it used flags and variables, and that it created what in a regular coding language would be conditional statements, but you
can read this as a conditional statement. If item to one is present, which is likely a flashlight, you turn on a flag flip this flag to is probably that the flashlight is lit, you switch the locations of the unlike and the lit flashlight and print a particular
message. In this case, probably it says you switch on the flashlight something like that. And then that command is done and this really increase the capacities of that sort of simple database based platform of gags into something which was really quite
powerful.
So people were
playing with a GT.
In compu serve gamers forum, we, we were working with other things as well. There were people playing with hypertext they were people playing with Tad's, which is the other quote hobbyist.
If system.
But Tad's was championed by the records people really, and it was directed towards programmers, it was more of a programming language and a GT was definitely touted as a system that you could use if you weren't a programmer and you didn't know anything
about code and I, as soon as I found it, I started teaching it so I moved to Santa Cruz, California, in 1989 and I became an artist in residence in schools I was doing Children's Theatre in schools and I slipped in.
an IF writing workshop into my slate of things I did in schools in Santa Cruz and found it to be a really wonderful.
I have platform for kids.
And I have had some of the kids that I taught to get back to me in later years,
about the influence of it in their lives so so att was criticized
mostly by the Tad's people I think and by who would become the future in form seven people as being primitive in some ways, and so I didn't really set out to show all that could be done with a GT but it turned out that that's what I did when I wrote this
game. And what this game is interesting as an ag t artifact but my interest in sharing it with you is not really so much about a GT but about compu serve, because I didn't know when I wrote it, that it would become important for restoring the life world
of compu serve gamers forum, because I didn't know compu serve gamers forum would disappear or that in the thorough way that it didn't disappear. So, I've taken some screenshots of the game, which is just faster than having me power it up I did low dose
box on to this laptop, so that I can play the original file I also have an informed seven port of the game, but I just took some screenshots.
The basic promise of the game is that you are a gender nonspecific self employed computer consultant called RJ, and you are writing a little app in Pascal.
And I should say that. The other thing that died from that era is Borland Borland, a rule the software world.
At the same time that compu serve ruled the BBs world, and the att rule that if world, and they all disappeared simultaneously in the mid 90s.
So Berlin made turbo Pascal and it had c++ and it was paradox and all the things that programmers were doing that felt cutting edge in health Borland products.
So, I had my main character be a Pascal programmer, and what you did when you were a Pascal programmer in that time was or any Berlin product is that you would go on to compu serve to the Borland forum and try to get help.
So that's the premise of the game is that you have to deliver your product on by the next morning and you have to get on to compu serve and you have to get help.
And so part of the gameplay when you're in your house is just like any other work of if person based. But what was different about this game is that when you turn on your computer, you enter a simulated dos environment and at that point you had to use
dos commands and regular if commands didn't work. You have to navigate to us just as, as if it was DOS, this is what does it look like if you didn't have a lot of stuff in your root directory.
Beep works if you type beep it'll beep.
I know didn't anticipate at the time that that in the future. The hardest part of the game would be navigating dos just knowing how to change a directories, you have to change directories.
To get to the Portland, that's the fake Borland directory to run the software. You have to.
There's a little password puzzle in your own house you have to get the right password, and then you use a dial up product to get onto compu serve and this is in fact what it looked like when you logged on to compu serve, back in the day.
I tried my hardest to replicate the feel of the dial up experience in the game, including the pace of it the slowness of it and the sounds of it the modem sound that beeps.
The various power of power down sounds.
And the famous top of compu serve, which would get you to the different things that you could do the forums and shopping and your electronic mail. And then there's a little science fiction here.
the virtual reality interface, which was
a little play I have when you're when you're when you're in virtual reality interface that works like ordinary if again person based.
So, but when you're in the simulation of compu serve it feels really a lot like what it felt like, when you got there and you went to your forum.
There would be announcements.
And so I did my, I sort of introduced the characters and the character development, and the puzzles, through the forums themselves through the announcements sincerest form wishes for a speedy recovery for user 99672347784 was placing the orphan mental
health facility after last week's virtual reality role playing adventure Get well soon mud puppy. So, this is the first hint that all is not right and copy serve.
It's, um, it's kind of a mystery.
Again, and you, but to solve it, you just have to live through a day on copy serve really, you have to pay attention to the conference schedule on different forums and show up there at the right time, or the room conference room is empty, you have to
read the public message boards where people are discussing what's going on here they're discussing what happened to mud puppy. Well he suffered a psychotic break during the role playing adventure, no other information blah blah blah.
Immediately after they asked Do you want to play the role play adventure that night, and the player has a chance.
The one thing that I couldn't do with att that I was able to do in inform seven was to allow the player to actually type and post back from so that was the one sort of point at which reality breaks when you're playing in my simulation, but you're allowed
to a yes or no reply to messages and then different things happen based on whether you're pulling you down. Here is what it looked like when you downloaded a file.
If you try to download any of the larger files.
I'm many hours go by, and then the file doesn't go through and this is a traditional experience of the time as well. Downloading was notoriously bad and files would be corrupted it would take incredible amount of time and money to do them.
So you can only really successfully download tiny files in this game. And then they were private messaging.
And so you get a live email messages just as it felt on top you serve back in the day, you would get notification you had a private message, we'd have to check back to see if they were imposed.
And then, This is a screenshot of a live conference.
If, if you do some other actions you will meet but puppy in a conference telling you that he's not crazy. That was a monster in VR, and he knows somebody did this to him, there's something nefarious going on.
He disappears and customer service will come and tell you that there's nobody in the conference. So there's live conferences, you have to fight the clock, and not get distracted, you join a lot of forums and in order to get onto virtual reality himself.
All right.
So, how does or fail to preserve its digital history, and what I discovered to my sort of joy is that it miraculously survives in bits of digital text when I contacted by Bates he went into his basement.
He brought up some discs, he, He looked in those disks and he found remarkable artifacts of conferences full of the writers and luminaries of the day, chatting with each other.
Right. And I have files that I downloaded.
And I have conference transcripts and I have public posts and I have private posts and private emails, and a lot of people have these things, so I'm hoping to kind of launch this restorative project to me monitor says he will help to get this out to his
readers who are significant number of them old enough to have this material, and it's going to be really exciting to see what I can find so I said I would return back to this little snippet of an artifact that's floating over the internet.
I immediately knew this was gamers forum. Besides that they're talking about games here, because not only is Bob Bates here but you see her care this is Hercules, who was Sasabe.
This started, I would, I would have to do a whole nother session on sis ops and their significance within communities. They weren't just moderators they were something like masters of ceremonies and hosts and Hercules was everybody's favorite we all loved
him and he facilitated a lot of interactive narrative discussions, and in fact, created for me, a room a separate conference room for a group of people that I collaborated with on another game that I wrote back in the era, which is certainly canonical
within at interactive fiction.
And I don't know Hercules his name, and it's a thing that I would, I, I put this out there like whenever I speak publicly about this hoping that somebody will know who he is.
And I, as I was doing one more vein Google search for Hercules, I found a conversation in some web page somewhere where somebody revealed that they had one spin a copy serve gamers this up, and somebody pointedly asks was your name Hercules.
By any chance, so I'm not the only person out there looking for Hercules.
He was part of that life world and his disappearance is part of sort of the disappearance of that life world.
There is a chance, a remarkable chance that we could get some of it back and.
However, the artifacts are not the community, and that's where I'm returning to the understanding that I had for my son and his flow experience in Oregon Trail, and you can't really get back real life in the era in which we played.
But my game Cosmos serve does. Let us briefly re enter it and lets people enter it.
Who never experienced it in the first place so game play. And especially games that simulate life of the much derided auto biographical games that most of us right the first time we discover hypertext narrative.
Interactive narrative any kind of my students, definitely. and those of you who teach will relate to this.
A lot of their first work is they recreate their walk from their dorm room to the bathroom right and every object in it.
And we laugh about that a lot the autopilot. the autobiographical element of our first interactive narratives, but I find these to be really valuable artifacts for the areas in which they're written the simulations of the life worlds around our games
in these early areas. That's the space in which I'm working. So if you have any interest in playing customer service, you can play the original you can download the original from IFTTT and it works in dust box I just tried it, I didn't need to just set
the settings to slow it down.
Otherwise the.
It was made for an earlier area very slow processing. And so you will, it goes too fast and the sound plays incorrectly. So you have to slow it down to make it really be like the original, but you can more comfortably played on my website, the enforcement
And I'll take any questions you've got.
Well thank you so much juice, I think we have some very appropriate people in the audience for a discussion about this so what should you, what should we ask, I think that was first with his little hand up there.
Zach you've got the microphone.
Oh, that was applause, oh I felt that was raising your hand. Okay.
Um. All right, I'm
so, so sorry Joe, I'm jumping, please. I'm I because I want to throw the Florida Judy, because I was just thinking so much about her experience of uncle Roger and the blue notebook.
As Judith sorry Judy Malloy June event are, you know, I just the resonance between uncle Roger and Cosmo serve is so strong, wanted to hear what you have to say about that.
Um, first of all, can you tell me the dates I haven't read the paper through yet. I'm Judith about the dates when you're talking about for this work.
I joined compu serve gamers forum in 1988 or 89 and I started writing this game in 1990, and it, it was in the att contest in 1991. So, so the era is really late 80s to mid 90s.
Great, thank you. This is absolutely wonderful. I really think terrifically did this.
And it's also so good that you're able to get back the artifacts from which to do it.
I know that I, I want to say stupidly was probably a good thing to do but I gave all my printouts to my archives at Duke. And I did not make copies because they were very extensive and I'm talking about the printouts from our comm electronic on the well,
which was a little earlier our calm hen began in 1986, but we did not have a large gamer presence, so I can certainly see why compu serve filled in that gap so.
Absolutely.
I used to log into conference, because I was in charge of posting Leonardo's and putting together we're known as electronic publications, and we did.
We did use copy serve as well as the well and using that as an email, but I never spent the time to explore compu serve so I'm really thinking I should have, and thank you again for doing this.
And I'd also like to point out that getting together the archives and putting all the archives for these things in one place is vitally important. And we should all be thinking about this.
I agree.
So it's our it's a distributed archive, but there's no reason why we can't index that distributed archive with all the places that these things live.
And this would be a decent intro organization activity for us, because I'm on the board of interactive interactive fiction technology foundation and we have a lot of great stuff in our archive.
But I don't think people know what we have in our archive. Right. And I don't know where all these things are archived, right, and as I do this, I was thinking to get my university library involved in it.
Just to make it more secure, and to see what they would be willing to invest in supporting any more extensive archiving but I don't see any reason to centralize, right, we can distribute as long as we're indexing, but this is something that we should
think about collaboratively cross institutions for sure.
Before things disappear I mean I talked to general Madonna, who is the virtual presenting virtual worlds study was my colleague here at the University of Illinois.
And the first thing he said to me, he said you have a very endangered collection.
Right. He said every, every month you Wait, is another box of floppy disks thrown out.
So that was kind of sobering to think about really for doing this kind of work so I I put in this paper to force me to launch this project even before I have a grant or whatever I should just start.
This is a fabulous thoughts about this. I was going to ask do you need to because, yeah, to what extent do you collect all this sort of ephemeral stuff around the works.
Oh, but you're muted Danny,
no coffee yet so.
So, Judas a couple of things. First, we've developed in the lab and meta data schema for electronic literature.
For the next right which is a big archive that we've built over the past three years, Leo and I and few other people involved in this.
And it's gone live now so we're ready to start taking in information, taking more data and we develop a meta data schema that includes the kind of functionality.
And in software, you know, dependencies that mods does not dress.
So what I can do is give you that spreadsheets, you can see, wonderful fields that we're looking at. Once you fill that out, and you want to begin to organize this stuff then we can work through cell, because we built in the cell taxonomy into this spreadsheet
for cross walking purposes. And then we can start to index all of these things across all the cell partner so this is something that can be done on a grand scale.
And as far as your collection goes, it'd be nice to have some sort of the next half the diversity next and a regular just kind of like em citizen, a wonderful solution for you know making the information you know available to people.
So I'd recommend you take that information you've got about your work and put into cell so that people can get to it through it I mean through the outset so that people can get that information.
If you're ever wanting to turn that into an archive in the next, we can set up a whole collection called copy server, some are gay or early games, and all of it can be then ingested into the larger library that we're building, and it all is available
through that, through the next system so you can either read it downloaded etc.
So that's the schema that we're developing for the electronic literature stuff that we're collecting for the organization. We have 3300 works in it right now and there's going to be another thousand by the end of summer, but certainly we've got the foundation
now to work, either with you to for guidance or and or and helping with getting into getting into what else it. Sorry I'm still haven't had any coffee so I'm still just kind of my photo.
Morning stuff. But they will definitely talk. I mean I think that that we need to not reinvent the wheel and we don't want multiple if we're going to coordinate on this we need a schema that we can all use.
So that's the indexing is effective.
So, not just sort of this project that I have which I probably will launch as a project and also our if TIFF archive could use a professional archivist.
And so we've been looking at trying to get some money to do that.
But I.
One of the things that.
So a lot of people put in the timeline, your own fears about the degradation right of things out of stasis for that.
for that post from Jason Scott about it isn't just that the things are thrown away the things that exist are degrading. Right, so we really, It really is a race.
And we need to get on it right that's how I feel about it because I mean I had this thought through the years, and it finally started to feel are urgent at some point and it is urgent.
You know collectively.
So, so thank you well. We'll talk.
The other thing that we're doing is, we have project Deep Freeze going on in the lab and we're ripping information off lobbies and putting in things that are copyrighted we're putting into a deep freeze, so that we don't upset peoples and copyright issues
and things like that are open, we're making it available so that's the project that Nicholas Schiller is doing right now and he presented about it yesterday that I'm interested in that too because the three things that McDonough and that group we're talking
had both kinds of floppy disks, sort of running, and then, but then you have your tape drive backup machines are they still working because we we backed up or flop is to tape drive through a couple different generations, but there's only so long you can
clutter your basement with one of every kind of computer you've ever had. Just so you can keep that up and you hope that you passed everything forward all the way to the CD, right at the at the point when we got to there.
So there's a lot of media so the software, hardware, but that's only one part then you have the legal part So you mentioned I love this deep freeze idea.
We archive we put it away until it's sort of copyright free or we can use it but it's not something like compu serve. I don't have permission. So I have these wonderful transcripts from what we're private conferences private chats, right.
And although we all recorded them did we have permission to record them, and, and even if I might legally be able to make public those conversations, do I ethically, can I should I do that and what about private emails like that's a that's those are very
important points, because I know on the well I don't know about Congress or but on the well we had a you own your own words policy, and you were not allowed to replicate anybody else's words without asking for permission.
So for instance, when I did an online version of bad information which is an early work I did on the well. I had to ask everyone have about 40 participants remission, and the issue still comes up no I got a general permission, that I could do that.
I could reuse that anytime. But when you're looking at say replica replicating conversations on a Cen, you're dealing with the fact that you have to ask everybody permission, if you want to use their words.
And the same is true. I just posted in, in discord a conversation that on Cooley, and I had with me dawn about a early hypertext work she had created.
And I recall that in order to reprint that conversation, and I had to ask everyone permission, and some people's words are left out because he didn't it did not give us permission or they did not respond with Comcast service that we all use handles, you
Oh yeah, I don't know who the people are so don't know me. So, the problem was me coming and saying hi and hoping to find my own copy serve, is that I didn't use my name Judas I was Taylor brown who's a character and Larry Nevins world, the luckiest woman in the world that was me. And, and that's what they know
And, and that's what they know me as, and I can't, I don't know their names to even get their permission and some of those conversations are remarkable I was, I went to graduate school in the, in the mid 90s, and that was toward the end of my companies
before company was sold to AOL right at the end. And I did a bunch of interviews for a paper that I didn't end up writing but I interviewed all these women gamers in the mid 90s about their experiences as women in that era, it's, it's a treasure right
it's a treasure those interviews. But what can I do with it now.
I don't know what I can do with that material.
Any.
So we've been given lots of emails from Richard Holton Dana Larsen.
And so I went through when I was putting that into the archives into the next. I went through the emails with the artist and determine which ones were viable to put out on the line online which ones we had to put away into the deep freeze.
Ironically, when I went to Duke, to see Judy will always papers Steffi Strickland's papers and Rob candles, Stephanie strict was emails were all there.
Every one of them. And it was, you know, it was interesting so I was looking for something about slipping glimpse, and all of her emails about and the kind of comments and stuff that was collected in is open at Duke library from Stephanie Strickland female
mail early day stuff from iOS development and I was surprised that all of that was available for me to reach our owner and I said did you make this. Did you make this available you know this is all out there free.
She didn't realize it, but it was some pretty interesting comments about various people community was like oh god I was definitely gotta go we gotta go can fix that.
So one of the girls on my sabbatical next year's to meet Stephanie and Durham and go through all those archives and clean that stuff up.
So that's right so this is fascinating, because these, these kinds of artifacts are our world artifacts, right that the texture of our worlds and our lives and our relationships, and our thoughts about I mean what did we talk about when we were chatting
and we're just always talking about literature right, we weren't it's talking about our works and our games and our writing we were talking about the world and politics and we were reading the same books and we were, it'd be.
It was the experience of being alive in that era so so that's that's part of what I was trying to get at at this paper and with the story of my son, which is that our, our, our interactive narrative worlds are in worlds, and that restoring the, the narrative
world also means somehow accessing the real world, the real life around them. And that's harder to come by. So, you know, what does that mean in terms of archiving and and curating right and that's where sort of simulations, I, if we have enough of these
If you we have enough of these digital artifacts, you can simulate and let people re enter like as a curation experience, sort of, re enter and experience what it was, what it was like, then you can't make that world come back because real life isn't
back that you can curate it in interesting immersive ways that people can enter and experience. Again, I think that's vitally important I know you're, I was really impressed with your emulation.
I'm from my heart, the work I get most inquiries about is brown House Kitchen, that I can't respond to not inquiries I can't respond to his brown House Kitchen which I did it on lambda move when I was at Park on working, Pablo Curtis.
Now, that work was available on lambda move until I got run down, and in a serious accident, and there was a rule of them to move that if you did not enter it and allow him to move in three months they would take your work down.
So guess what.
I didn't even notice that so about a year later because there were other things I had to attend to, such as walking on crutches for the rest of my life, and I still get up, I wrote two book chapters on that work, but I still get a lot of inquiries about.
Can I emulate it. Well, you know what I might be able to emulate that work, but I took all the printouts I have printouts of how I developed it, I have printouts of all the code was written in a lambda mu code which was a cross between C plus and list.
And guess what, I gave them all to do.
Now, that means they do exist and I think that's important. The mistake I made was not copying that myself, because it never occurred to me that if I wanted that I would have to go to Duke although the original curator there didn't say they would copy
set for me I think this is a couple hundred pages.
But I guess the point I'm making is a give yourself to to sustainable archives and be keep copies yourself.
And one more thing was during the pandemic and especially in the United States, even before the pandemic when budget cuts were coming through with the recession.
There was so little money to travel so when I went to Duke. To do that research, I was the only person that ever looked at Judy Malloy Stephanie circling or, Rob.
Rob Kindles collections. I went back for a second time I was still the second person.
And the reason was problematic about that is it means here's his treasure trove, I mean I was looking at Judy stuff oh my god, it's just this is marvelous.
Right. But the problem is, somebody's got to fly there fly to Durham, you know, took the time to get there. Yeah, they have to get funding for that I had someone else use the archives recently who someone who was writing a paper on early, early work on
ours takes on genetic engineering and I happened to have an okay genetic engineering project. So they went down to look at that.
We hadn't talked thoroughly enough. So, I, she didn't wasn't aware that actually the entire files for okay genetic engineering or not at Duke they're in a storage and in Richmond, California to which I do not have access to because I'm not in California
and I don't travel easily.
So, I'm Duke Actually, my contract was Duke is for electronic literature, so I didn't give them the occasional engineering files. But once again, here we, there's a lot of issues involved in, in, you know, what's a work of art, what goes in your archives.
I don't think you know unless you Dini has done an awful lot of work on this mad Christian bomb has done work on this. We need to have funding for more work on this.
Well the thing I was going to say, finish by saying is that the nice thing about the Rubinstein is that it's like, I mean, I can call them and say I need this stuff and they would email it to me, the ransom library, unless you're physically there, they
won't give you anything.
You can get I couldn't get to Michael Joyce's papers for the book I'm writing right now, until I fly to Austin to do it and I couldn't get into the music into the center because it's locked down for endemic.
So, what we're trying to build with the next is the ability to make all this stuff available without somebody having a friggin travel.
So that's something we're in the middle now of starting phase four which is our is digitizing all the paper archives, and we have eight boxes of turbulence, with step by Cory Cory Archangel Mike McGruder and we're talking major stuff that anybody would
love to download. So that's the next one of the next things we're doing is getting that stuff available so people just click a link and download where they want without having to fly somewhere or call somebody.
I mean that's the future of libraries, museums and stuff. And as far as the physical media we're pre modeling all of those things so people can see them.
They're looking like in real in real time so I mean there's just there's new ways to think about this stuff.
And that's what we're trying to accomplish and then one other thing about Judy's collection is that she's got, you know, the uncle Roger floppy disk right that's nowhere near the archives, you have to separate.
So you, you look in the archives you see the paper that was packaged in, but the floppy disk or somewhere else, so nothing is put in situ like in context of each other.
And I'm not being ugly about this I'm just it's just, it's not the way we function in our world.
It's the way libraries have function the print or well you know because with this you know I do understand its policy on that issue. I mean anybody could take that disc, and that may be one of, maybe three or four discs I have or I give them to various
places of the original uncle Roger.
I, and it's pretty easy to destroy the discs. When somebody could walk into that library, and if they had access to the disk, do something that would make it inoperable so I do understand their point of view at that issue.
But a moment at least they're taking your disks, and they are ripping them, rather than making sure that they are doing that in a great job with your stuff.
One of the things that if TIFF has been talking about.
It's not in the front of anybody's mind but it is on mine, which is being proactive in archiving and that's going to authors and saying, Please don't throw away your notes.
If you you know when you're cleaning your office, you know.
And people always surprised to be told that they are of historical significance right. They're like what might have my sketches my mind, why would you want that stuff right.
It's well, maybe you don't see significance now but somebody in 100 years might be looking for it and wanting it and so being proactive about it rather than waiting for people, it's self selecting if you wait for people who see themselves as historically
interesting right. We need the people who don't see themselves as historically interesting and go after them and ask for their stuff right and get permissions from the gecko and, and actually be more active collecting are the things that we value in our,
in our community across it.
So,
are we approaching the end of the the panel.
What's the low Do you know what the next thing on the agenda is right now right okay yeah we're supposed to be on a break now and at 1130 is the keynote.
Okay, and 1130 just translate that into how Hello, minutes in a minute. Oh well then we better end the session so we can all move around get a cup of tea or something and then we get the keynote.